[Minor?] Start documenting and defining the ABI for FIRRTL (#103)
chipsalliance/firrtl-spec: abi.md

---
author:
- The FIRRTL Specification Contributors
title: Specification for the FIRRTL ABI
revisionHistoryAbi: true
---

> 

Reviewer: @seldridge does something need to be added here to make the revision history show up? Or does that happen automatically due to what you did in the previous PR?

Reviewer 2: Nothing else needs to be added. I landed the support earlier. This specific config option was added in https://github.com/chipsalliance/firrtl-spec/commit/9bb1272145484afcd698015e2b6de648123629ee.

This is mega-jank (due to limitations of using a single LaTeX template, what pandoc lets you do, and my own skill), but there are two configuration options you can define up front:

```yaml
revisionHistoryAbi:
revisionHistorySpec:
```

Each of these, if defined, controls, respectively, whether the `abi` or `spec` parts of the `revision-history.yaml` are included in that Revision History section of a document. This clearly doesn't scale well to multiple documents and it would be nice to customize the LaTeX template based on the value associated with a key as opposed to the existence of a key (but pandoc doesn't let you do this as far as I know). It's good enough for today, though.

Reviewer 2: Here is what this looks like in the built `.pdf`s:

<img width="1195" alt="Screenshot 2023-05-03 at 15 24 43" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1018530/236023590-fedf6f8e-cd71-4a8f-acd6-2c60082bd259.png">
<img width="1185" alt="Screenshot 2023-05-03 at 15 25 21" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1018530/236023593-3d4439f1-4d2c-4f4e-a1cb-9542333a0d01.png">

Reviewer: Looks great!

---
author:
- The FIRRTL Specification Contributors
title: Specification for the FIRRTL ABI
revisionHistoryAbi: true
---

# Introduction

FIRRTL defines a language/IR for describing synchronous hardware circuits.  This
document specifies the mapping of FIRRTL constructs to Verilog in a manner
similar to an application binary interface (ABI) which enables predictability of
the output of key constructs necessary for the interoperability between circuits
described in FIRRTL and between other languages and FIRRTL output.

This document describes multiple versions of the ABI, specifically calling
specific changes in later versions.  It is expected that a conforming FIRRTL
compiler can lower to all specified ABIs.  This mechanism exists to allow
improved representations when using tools which have better Verilog support and

> allow migration of existing development flows to significant representational

Reviewer 3: "allow migration.. to significant representational changes"? What does this mean?

changes.

# FIRRTL System Verilog Interface

> To use a circuit describe in FIRRTL in a predictable way, the mapping of certain

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use a circuit described in FIRRTL in a predictable way, the mapping of certain
```

behaviors and boundary constructs in FIRRTL to System Verilog must be defined.
Where possible this ABI does not impose constraints on implementation,
concerning itself primarily with the boundaries of the circuit.

## On Modules

### The Circuit and Top Level

The top level module, as specified by the circuit name, shall be present as a
System Verilog module of the same name.  This firrtl module is considered a

> "public" module and subject to the lowering constraints for public modules.

Reviewer 4: "public" under who's notion of publicness? Is there a public in SystemVerilog?

Reviewer 4: Ah. I see it's defined below.

### External Modules

An external module may be presumed to exist following the lowering constraints
for public modules.  The module shall exist with a verilog name matching the 
defname value or, lacking that, the module name.

###  Public Modules

Any module considered a "public" module shall be implemented in Verilog in a
consistent way.  Any public module shall exist as a Verilog module of the same
name.

Each public module with definitions (e.g. not external modules) shall be placed
in a file with the same name.  No assumption is made of the filename of an
implementation of an external module, it is the user's job to include files in
such a way in their tools to resolve the name.

### Port Lowering ABIv1

Ports are generally lowered to netlist types, except where Verilog's type system
prevents it.

Ports of integer types shall be lowered to netlist ports (`wire`{.verilog}) as a

> packed vector of equivalent size.  For example, consider the following FIRRTL:

Reviewer 4: Should it be mandated as well that the numbering be done with the schema `[n-1:0]` for an integer type of n-bits?

Author: Good catch.  Done.

```firrtl
circuit Top :
  module Top :
    output out: UInt<16>
    input b: UInt<32>
```

This is lowered to the following Verilog:

```verilog
module Top(
    output wire [15:0] out,
    input wire [31:0] in
);
```

Ports of aggregate type shall be lowered according to the "Aggregate Type

> Lowering" description in the firrtl spec.

Reviewer 3: `s/firrtl/FIRRTL/g` (in the text anyway).

Ports of enum type shall be lowered to ports of a type consistent with the rules

> for lowering firrtl enum types to Verilog.

Reviewer 4: This seems like a punt. Could we either be explicit about what we mean by "rules for lowering firrtl enum types" or else make a note admitting that we aren't ready to commit to a single rule at this point in time?

Author: put the forward reference in.  Will add the lowering.

> Ports of ref type shall be lowered to a Verilog macro of the form `` `define

Reviewer: > Is the build system responsible for picking up these ABI side-files (and bringing them to where they're needed for separate compilation purposes)? Glad the "what's needed to link against" information is split out.

I think the answer written is "yes" -- we could say that the compiler has to add `include anywhere the port is used but that is not necessary for now

> Ports of ref type shall be lowered to a Verilog macro of the form `` `define

Author: I think a workable solution for type lowered abi is in now.

> ref_<circuit name>_<module name>_<portname> <internal path from module>`` in a

Reviewer 3: As we add other non-hw "things" to FIRRTL (?), it may be useful to have them all in a single "link-interface" sort of file, vs naming a single file for each "kind" of information per module?

Probably premature to try to accommodate those needs, especially as the nature of what information is needed is not yet known, but want to get that in front of us so we don't end up with too many side files describing higher-level details of the emitted Verilog code.

Author: When we know, we'll do it.

file with name `ref_<circuit name>_<module name>.sv`.

> ### Port Lowering ABIv2

Reviewer 4: It looks like we're defining multiple ABIs in this document. If that is the case, we should make sure to motivate why we need more than one. (Especially for the initial version of the doc).

Reviewer: there are different versions used even in the same spec, for public vs internal modules

Author: internal modules have no ABI constraints.
v1 is essentially documenting what the contract is now.
v2 is aggregate-preserving.
They are not remotely compatible.  These things can be stated explicitly.

Ports are lowered per the v1 ABI above, except for aggregate types.

Vectors shall be lowered to Verilog packed vectors.

Bundles shall be recursively split as per "Aggregate Type Lowering", except
instead of recursively converting bundles to ground types, the recursion stops
at passive types.

Passive bundles shall be lowered to Verilog packed structs.

Reference types in ports shall be logically split out from aggregates and named
as though "Aggregate Type Lowering" was used.

## On Types

Types are only guaranteed to follow this lowering when the Verilog type is
visible for some reason related to the visibility of the element.  These include

> use in ports and elements exported by reference through a public module.

Reviewer 4: This might be made clearer by defining a notion of a "public" type analogous to a public module. It isn't unclear as it stands, but it might be good to have that definition in our back pocket for later.

Author: Since types in firrtl are structural, I don't want to claim a particular lowering for a type, but rather for circuit elements which are visible and have that type.

Ground types are lowered to the `logic`{.verilog} data type (SV.6.3.1), which is
the 4-valued type.  It is important to distinguish the `logic`{.verilog} data
type from using `logic`{.verilog} as a keyword to declare a variable instead of
net-list object.

Unsigned integers produce an unsigned packed bit vector.  Whether variable or

> netlist depends on the construct being used.

Reviewer 4: This isn't to do with this document, but what is the distinction between a "variable" and a "netlist" here? Is this `reg` vs `wire` in Verilog? Or am I completely off-base?

Author: reg/logic v.s. wire in verilog.

Signed integers produce an unsigned packed bit vector.  Whether variable or
netlist depends on the construct being used.

Passive bundles, when lowered, are lowered to packed structs with their fields
recursively following these lowering rules.

> Vectors, when lowered, are lowered to packed vectors with their element type

Reviewer 4: It might be good hygiene to give explicit examples, in this section and earlier, of the FIRRTL types and the lowered SystemVerilog types that come from its lowering.

Author: Yes, but I think that can be a follow on PR.

recursively following these rules.

# Versioning Scheme of this Document

This is the versioning scheme that applies to version 1.0.0 and later.

The versioning scheme complies with
[Semantic Versioning 2.0.0](https://semver.org/#semantic-versioning-200).

Specifically,

The PATCH digit is bumped upon release which only includes non-functional changes,
such as grammar edits, further examples, and clarifications.

The MINOR digit is bumped for feature additions to the spec.

The MAJOR digit is bumped for backwards-incompatible changes such as features
being removed from the spec, changing their interpretation, or new required
features being added to the specification.

> In other words, any `.fir` file that was compliant with `x.y.z` will be compliant

Reviewer: made a suggestion below

> In other words, any `.fir` file that was compliant with `x.y.z` will be compliant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, any `.sv` file that was emitted in a fashion compliant with `x.y.z` will be compliant
```

and formalizes the historic behavior of FIRRTL to verilog lowering.  
Specifically, this ABI, by construction, produces no aggregate Verilog types.
ABIv2 defines an ABI in which aggregate types are preserved.  Both these ABIs 
may evolve as new FIRRTL constructs are added.

## On Modules

### The Circuit and Top Level

The top level module, as specified by the circuit name, shall be present as a
System Verilog module of the same name.  This FIRRTL module is considered a
"public" module and subject to the lowering constraints for public modules.

### External Modules

An external module may be presumed to exist following the lowering constraints
for public modules.  The module shall exist with a verilog name matching the 
defname value or, lacking that, the module name.

###  Public Modules

Any module considered a "public" module shall be implemented in Verilog in a
consistent way.  Any public module shall exist as a Verilog module of the same
name.

Each public module with definitions (e.g. not external modules) shall be placed
in a file with the same name.  No assumption is made of the filename of an
implementation of an external module, it is the user's job to include files in

> such a way in their tools to resolve the name.

Reviewer 2: This requirement of public modules being in separate files is reasonable. However, this has some complications:

1. Where is the sub-hierarchy of a public module emitted? What happens if two public modules instantiate the same private sub-module?
2. This disallows any single-file emission mode for any circuit which has a public module other than the just the main module. That's possibly fine, but may not be desired.

Author: public non-top modules is a new thing, so I don't think we are too worried about it.  Single-public top still supports single file emission.

as for (1), the more general question is "what are all the things I need to include and in what order?" and I've side stepped that a few places for now.

at least one payload will lower to a packed struct containing a tag field which 
is a Verilog enum, as well as a data field containing a packed union of the 
padded types of the payloads.  A padded payload is a packed struct with the 
payload as the first field and a packed bit vector as a second field.  The 
padding for each payload is set to ensure all padded payloads have the same bit
width as required by Verilog packed unions.

# Versioning Scheme of this Document

This is the versioning scheme that applies to version 1.0.0 and later.

The versioning scheme complies with
[Semantic Versioning 2.0.0](https://semver.org/#semantic-versioning-200).

Specifically,

The PATCH digit is bumped upon release which only includes non-functional changes,
such as grammar edits, further examples, and clarifications.

The MINOR digit is bumped for feature additions to the spec.

The MAJOR digit is bumped for backwards-incompatible changes such as features
being removed from the spec, changing their interpretation, or new required
features being added to the specification.

In other words, any verilog generated that was emitted with `x.y.z` will be 

> compliant with `x.Y.Z`, where `Y >= y`, `z` and `Z` can be any number.

Reviewer 2: This can just say that this document is co-versioned with the FIRRTL specification.

---
author:
- The FIRRTL Specification Contributors
title: Specification for the FIRRTL Language
date: \today
# Options passed to the document class
classoption:
- 12pt
# Link options
colorlinks: true
linkcolor: blue
filecolor: magenta
urlcolor: cyan
toccolor: blue
# General pandoc configuration
toc: true
numbersections: true
# Header Setup
pagestyle:
  fancy: true
# Margins
geometry: margin=1in
# pandoc-crossref
autoSectionLabels: true
figPrefix:
  - Figure
  - Figures
eqnPrefix:
  - Equation
  - Equations
tblPrefix:
  - Table
  - Tables
lstPrefix:
  - Listing
  - Listings
secPrefix:
  - Section
  - Sections
# This 'lastDelim' option does not work...
lastDelim: ", and"
---

# Introduction

FIRRTL defines a language/IR for describing synchronous hardware circuits.  This

> document specifies the mapping of FIRRTL constructs to verilog in a manner 

Reviewer 5: I believe Verilog is a proper name so s/verilog/Verilog/

similar to an application binary interface (ABI) which enables predictability of
the output of key constructs necessary for the interoperability between circuits 
described in FIRRTL and between other languages and FIRRTL output.

This document describes multiple versions of the ABI, specifically calling 
specific changes in later versions.  It is expected that a conforming FIRRTL

> compile can lower to all specified ABIs.  This mechanism exist to allow 

Reviewer: Compiler, exists

improved representations when using tools which have better verilog support and
allow migration of existing development flows to significant representational 
changes.

# FIRRTL System Verilog Interface

To use a circuit describe in FIRRTL in a predictable way, the mapping of certain 
behaviors and boundary constructs in FIRRTL to System Verilog must be defined.  
Where possible this ABI does not impose constraints on implementation, 
concerning itself primarily with the boundaries of the circuit.

## On Modules

### The Circuit and Top Level

The top level module, as specified by the circuit name, shall be present as a
System Verilog module of the same name.  This firrtl module is considered a 
"public" module and subject to the lowering constraints for public modules.

### External Modules

> An external module may be presumed to exist following the lowering constraints

Reviewer 6: Is it worth mentioning that external modules have the optional `defname` override for the Verilog name?

Author: yes, quite.

for public modules.

###  Public Modules

Any module considered a "public" module shall be implemented in verilog in a
consistent way.  Any public module shall exist as a verilog module of the same 
name.

> Each public modules with definitions (e.g. not external modules) shall be placed 

Reviewer: module
